This is the code book for the Coursera "Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project" assignment.

The assignment description follows:

	"Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project"
 
	"The purpose of this project is to demonstrate your ability to collect, work with, and clean a data set. The goal is to prepare tidy data that can be used for 	later analysis. You will be graded by your peers on a series of yes/no questions related to the project. You will be required to submit: 1) a tidy data set as 	described below, 2) a link to a Github repository with your script for performing the analysis, and 3) a code book that describes the variables, the data, and 	any transformations or work that you performed to clean up the data called CodeBook.md. You should also include a README.md in the repo with your scripts. This 	repo explains how all of the scripts work and how they are connected.

	One of the most exciting areas in all of data science right now is wearable computing - see for example this article . Companies like Fitbit, Nike, and Jawbone 	Up are racing to develop the most advanced algorithms to attract new users. The data linked to from the course website represent data collected from the 	accelerometers from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone. A full description is available at the site where the data was obtained:

		http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones (link was not working)

	Here are the data for the project:

	 	https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip  (the run_analysis.R script will download the file for you)

	You should create one R script called run_analysis.R that does the following. 

		Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
		Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. 
		Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
		Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names. 
		From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject."

Files:

The dataset zip file will be unzipped and a folder with the following structure will contain the data used for this analysis.  A brief note on the file follows a double hyphen in parenthesis.

	UCI HAR Dataset
		README.txt -- (for information)
		features.txt -- (original variable labels)
		features_info.txt -- (for information)
		activity_lables.txt --(original activity labels)
		test
			y_test.txt -- (activity corresponding to each test observation)
			X_test.txt -- (observation data for each feature (varible) of the test dataset)
			subject_test.txt -- (subject list corresponding to each test observation)
			Inertial Signals -- (not used directly)
				body_acc_x_test.txt
				body_acc_y_test.txt
				body_acc_z_test.txt
				body_gyro_x_test.txt
				body_gyro_y_test.txt
				body_gyro_z_test.txt
				total_acc_x_test.txt
				total_acc_y_test.txt
				total_acc_z_test.txt
		train
			y_train.txt  -- (activity corresponding to each training observation)
			X_train.txt  -- (observation data for each feature (varible) of the training dataset)
			subject_train.txt  -- (subject list corresponding to each training observation)
			Inertial Signals -- (not used directly)
				body_acc_x_train.txt
				body_acc_y_train.txt
				body_acc_z_train.txt
				body_gyro_x_train.txt
				body_gyro_y_train.txt
				body_gyro_z_train.txt
				total_acc_x_train.txt
				total_acc_y_train.txt
				total_acc_z_train.txt

The other files in the parent directory that are required for the analysis is the R script file and the resulting csv file with the completed analysis data.
	run_analysis.R -- (R script file containing the code used for this analysis)
	tidydata.csv -- (created by the run_analysis.R codescript summarizing the mean of the dataset variables by subject and activity)

Information on the original dataset and the original calculations performed is included in the readme file contained in the zip file.  The license is copied here for ease of use.

	License:
	========
	Use of this dataset in publications must be acknowledged by referencing the following publication [1] 

	[1] Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-	Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012

	This dataset is distributed AS-IS and no responsibility implied or explicit can be addressed to the authors or their institutions for its use or misuse. Any 	commercial use is prohibited.

	Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Davide Anguita. November 2012.

Intermediate Variables:

"trainadt" - Index of activities in the training observation datasets with values ranging from 1 to 6.  This variable was read from the y_train.txt file using the 		fread function.
"trainsdt" - Index of subjects in the training observation datasets with values ranging from 1 to 30.  This variable was read from the subject_train.txt file using the 		fread function.  
"traindt" - This is the training dataset which starts as 561 variables and 7352 observations that are read from the X_train.txt file with the fread function.  This 		variable is manipulated throughout the analysis by adding labels, eliminating the unused columns (variables) and combining the data with the subject 		and activity indexes used to sort the data for the final analysis, calculating the mean of the mean and standard deviation variables for each subject 			and activity.
"testadt" - Index of activities in the test observation datasets with values ranging from 1 to 6.  This variable was read from the y_test.txt file using the 				fread function.   
"testsdt" - Index of subjects in the test observation datasets with values ranging from 1 to 30.  This variable was read from the subject_test.txt file using the 			fread function.
"testdt" - The test dataset which starts as 561 variables and 7352 observations that are read from the X_test.txt file with the fread function.  This variable is 		manipulated throughout the analysis by adding labels, eliminating the unused columns (variables) and combining the data with the subject and activity 		indexes used to sort the data for the final analysis, calculating the mean of the mean and standard deviation variables for each subject and activity.
"labeldt" - Index of the 561 variables in observation files, read in by the fread function from the features.txt file.
"activitylabel" - Index and list of the 6 activities read from the activity_labels.txt file using the fread function.
"features" - is an integer vector, a subset of the labeldt index list that contains only mean or std variable names followed by () which excludes the meanfreq 				variables.
"values" - is a character vector, a subset of the labeldt descriptive label list that corresponds with the indexs of the features variable.  These desciptive labels 			are simplified by removing special characters such as "()" and "-" and all of the letters are converted to lower case.  The "t" is replaced with the 			word "time", the "f" is replaced with the word "frequency" and "Acc" is replaced with the word "acceleration" using the gsub function.
"totaldt" - This is the combined data table combined from the traindt and the testdt variables using rbind.  This data table is then factored on activity and subject 			to allow for sorting and the mean to be calculated on the remaining variables for each subject and activity.  This results in a table of 180 rows 			corresponding to the 6 activies times 30 subjects for the 66 mean and std variables.

The following data was imported through the traindt and testdt variables and the original values are described in the features_info.txt file.  These original values were labeled according to the labels in the features.txt file and the mean and std of each of these were extracted for each subject and activity.
tBodyAcc-XYZ
tGravityAcc-XYZ
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
tBodyGyro-XYZ
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
tBodyAccMag
tGravityAccMag
tBodyAccJerkMag
tBodyGyroMag
tBodyGyroJerkMag
fBodyAcc-XYZ
fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
fBodyGyro-XYZ
fBodyAccMag
fBodyAccJerkMag
fBodyGyroMag
fBodyGyroJerkMag

The mean of these variables were calculated and summarized by subject and activity and are tabulated with the corresponding output variables listed below.  Per the embedded readme file in the zip folder, the units are in standard gravity units 'g' for the accelerometer and the units are in radians per second for the angular acceleration from the gyroscope.
 
Output variables:
"timebodyaccelerationmeanx"               
"timebodyaccelerationmeany"               
"timebodyaccelerationmeanz"               
"timebodyaccelerationstdx"                
"timebodyaccelerationstdy"                
"timebodyaccelerationstdz"
"timegravityaccelerationmeanx"            
"timegravityaccelerationmeany"            
"timegravityaccelerationmeanz"            
"timegravityaccelerationstdx"             
"timegravityaccelerationstdy"             
"timegravityaccelerationstdz"             
"timebodyaccelerationjerkmeanx"           
"timebodyaccelerationjerkmeany"            
"timebodyaccelerationjerkmeanz"           
"timebodyaccelerationjerkstdx"            
"timebodyaccelerationjerkstdy"            
"timebodyaccelerationjerkstdz"            
"timebodygyromeanx"                       
"timebodygyromeany"                       
"timebodygyromeanz"                       
"timebodygyrostdx"                        
"timebodygyrostdy"                        
"timebodygyrostdz"                        
"timebodygyrojerkmeanx"
"timebodygyrojerkmeany"                   
"timebodygyrojerkmeanz"                   
"timebodygyrojerkstdx"                    
"timebodygyrojerkstdy"                    
"timebodygyrojerkstdz"                    
"timebodyaccelerationmagmean"             
"timebodyaccelerationmagstd"              
"timegravityaccelerationmagmean"
"timegravityaccelerationmagstd"           
"timebodyaccelerationjerkmagmean"         
"timebodyaccelerationjerkmagstd"          
"timebodygyromagmean"                     
"timebodygyromagstd"                      
"timebodygyrojerkmagmean"                 
"timebodygyrojerkmagstd"                  
"frequencybodyaccelerationmeanx"
"frequencybodyaccelerationmeany"          
"frequencybodyaccelerationmeanz"          
"frequencybodyaccelerationstdx"           
"frequencybodyaccelerationstdy"           
"frequencybodyaccelerationstdz"           
"frequencybodyaccelerationjerkmeanx"      
"frequencybodyaccelerationjerkmeany"      
"frequencybodyaccelerationjerkmeanz"      
"frequencybodyaccelerationjerkstdx"       
"frequencybodyaccelerationjerkstdy"       
"frequencybodyaccelerationjerkstdz"
"frequencybodygyromeanx"                  
"frequencybodygyromeany"                  
"frequencybodygyromeanz"                  
"frequencybodygyrostdx"                   
"frequencybodygyrostdy"                   
"frequencybodygyrostdz"                   
"frequencybodyaccelerationmagmean"        
"frequencybodyaccelerationmagstd"         
"frequencybodybodyaccelerationjerkmagmean"
"frequencybodybodyaccelerationjerkmagstd" 
"frequencybodybodygyromagmean"            
"frequencybodybodygyromagstd"
"frequencybodybodygyrojerkmagmean"        
"frequencybodybodygyrojerkmagstd"     